Page 1
 
978-1-7281 -1268 -8/19/$31.00 ©2019 IEEE  The role of comprehensive function models in the 
managem ent of heterogeneous industrial  networks  
 
Santiago Soler Perez Olaya , Martin Wollschlaeger  
Chair of Industrial Communications  
Institute of Applied Computer Science  
Technische Universität Dresden  
Dresden, Germany  
{santiago.soler , martin.wollschlaeger} @tu-dresden.de  
 
Abstract  — The current tren ds in i ndustry  require more 
interconnectivity, interoperability and flexibility to adapt to 
continuous optimizat ion of the production processes . In this 
landscape , industrial evolution prompts the need for a 
management concept capable of dealing with the heterogeneity . In 
the future with the incoming Industrial Internet of Things and 
other disruptive approaches , this demand will grow dramatically . 
The comprehensive function models for the management of 
heterogeneous industrial networks represent a domain specific 
abstraction . This abstraction  enable s the development of holistic 
management approaches that can deal with the heterogeneity  in 
the management plane.  In thi s way , they offer  a solution for the 
future problems of the management of industrial network s 
regarding of the enhancement  needed to perform the new trends 
driven by the Factories of the Future and the “Industrie 4.0 ”. 
Keywords —network management, industrial heterogeneous 
networks, comprehensive management function models , meta -model  
I. INTRODUCTION  
Nowadays there is a big effort ongoing towards the evolution 
of the  industrial value chains and productive environments. In 
Europe,  it is founded by the investments in Horizon 2020 
including the Factories of the Future  (FoF)  Public -Private 
Partnership  [1] of the EU Commission and by the “Industrie 
4.0” (I40)  [2] of the Federal Mi nistry of Education and Research  
in Germany . 
Another evolution trend in i ndustry is the use  of the Internet 
of Things approach in the so-called  Industrial Internet of Things 
(IIoT)  [3] [4]. The basic idea of IIoT is to deploy a parallel 
network of sensors  [5] through the production facilities, ma inly 
with the purpose of getting  information in real time with a 
flexible degree of precision  and diversity. For example, 
temperature and motion sensor s can be used to gather decisive 
information relativ e to maintenance and process optimization. 
This approach is very promising but it also represents a 
challenge to the management of the network in the production 
facility, as it  increase s the amount of active nodes in the network 
significantly.  
This paper explains the role of the comprehensive  
management  function models  (CMFM)  in the management of 
heterogeneous industrial networks  (HetIndNets) . These CMFM s are a domain specific abstraction of the management tasks . They  
are a key enabler for the management of HetIndNets  by aiming 
to enhance the interoperability in the management plane.  This 
interoperability is indispensable to have a future ready network 
management . 
This paper is s tructured in five sections. Section II gives an 
overview of the state of the art focusing on the different aspects 
relevant for the network m anagement in industrial domain . 
Section III elaborates the main concept of the CMFMs  as well 
as their meta -model  and relevance in the man agement of 
HetIndNet s. Section IV offers a practical use-case taking 
advantage of the CMFM s approach. Section V closes the 
document with the conclusions and further steps of this research.   
II. STATE OF THE ART 
Today’s industrial systems grow with further digitalization 
and face the problem of increasing  heterogeneity . The fieldbuses 
were developed to address the needs of information exchange 
inside a closed domain. There are two main reasons for this 
closeness  that nowadays persist: firstly, the optimization of the 
communication resources , and secondly, the security issues of 
an unencrypted standardized  sensible data transfer.  
The approach of IIoT avoids the restrictions of the legacy 
industrial communication systems  by deploying new sensor 
networks that take advantage of state of the art communication 
technologies and deliver real time measurements  of the 
production process in parallel to the fieldbus, thus not interfering 
with the functioning of the productive facility  (given 
electromagnetic compatibility is provisioned ). This circumvents 
the interoperability prob lem and allows the use of predictive 
maintenance and optimization techniques  at the business level . 
However, it also increases the heterogeneity  of the system and it 
does not solve the management problem.  
A. Network Management in Industry  
The network management in industry is in most cases an 
integrated part of the system management.  The separation of 
data, control, and management plane – nowadays state of the art 
in the IT communication systems – is inexistent  in the  
implementation of legacy industrial systems . In addition, the 
management interfaces used in the industrial domain  are usually 
Authorized licensed use limited to: SLUB Dresden. Downloaded on October 21,2025 at 17:31:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

Page 2
 
 proprietary and remain exclusively for the use of own tools of 
the manufacturer/provider of the hardware . 
Besides exchange of pro cess data, t he communication is also 
used for example for synchronization or as heartbeat of the 
industrial application. Some timing decisions about the 
communication are  often  related to the control cycle of the 
control  applications – motion, temperature, etc.  By doing so, the 
field devices can remain simple and the intelligence is kept in a 
central node  of the industrial application, the Programmable 
Logic Controller ( PLC). It is responsible for  the correct timing 
of th e signals and actions while some simple  field devices just 
react to the communication without caring about further 
synchronization or correctness.  As t he boundary between 
application and network is inexistent,  the abstraction or 
substitution of the communi cation technology is a challenge in 
the best cases.  
Furthermore, t o ensure the correct functioning and timing of 
the industrial application, the network configuration is designed 
in the engineering phase  of the production facility and remains 
largely uncha nged until the next modification of the system in a 
further engineering phase. This provides some level of 
robustness very appreciated in i ndustry. However, it also keeps 
the system away from the flexib ility desired by the new 
industrial trends . The interc hange of modules in a productive 
system in runtime is something unthinkable without huge 
previous efforts in the engineering phase. Only what is 
previously planned up to the last detail can be achieved with the 
current legacy industrial technologies. The m anagement of the 
network in runtime is performed by the PLC in the role of master  
of the fieldbus, following  the preprogrammed configuration . 
This fact also represents an issue for the separation of network 
and system management.   
A big effort of I40 is to harmonize the access to management 
and engineering -related data and functions in industry. Every 
valuable thing for the value chain is an “Asset” in I40. An Asset 
shall have an Asset Administration Shell  (AAS)  [6] that 
accompanies  it at least for a given period of its life cycle. An 
Asset can/should have many AAS that contain and manage the 
information relevant to it and are responsible of aiding in the 
interaction between the asset and its environment.  The AAS 
shall manage this interaction using an I40 yet -to-standardize 
communication service and still-not-listed partial models that 
describe the capabilities and requirements of the asset. The list 
of management functions or services offered by the AAS 
approach is a lso yet to define.  
B.  Network Management Systems  
There are many network management systems. Most  of 
them, like the Management framework for Open Systems 
Interconnection  (OSI Management) [7], are standards coming 
from the IT branch. Other s, like Fieldbus Management in 
PROFIBUS  [8], are integral part of industrial systems.  
Regarding their diversity, the majority of the  network 
management systems have in common that they define 
functions, operations,  or methods.  Some of these  are listed  in 
Table  1. Another common point of the  netwo rk management 
systems is the use  of managed objects to repres ent the 
management information. Many of these functions  were designed to operate  the managed objects  that represent with 
some level of abstraction the real devices or part of the real 
devices that they are intended to manage.  
The managed objects represent another issue  for the 
interoperability between different systems . Even when the 
management functions were the same, the managed objects are 
in many cases  differ ent from one system to another, also  from 
one vendor to another in the same type of devices . The  
communication systems are no exception to this.  One of the most 
widespread  management protocols  is the Simple Network 
Management Protocol (SNMP). Its acceptance relies on its 
simplicity. Nevertheless , even with SNMP compatible devices, 
the interoperability  in the management plane  depends on the 
compatibility of the managed information base implemented  in 
the different devices.  
III. COMPREHENSIVE MANAGEMENT FUNCTION MODELS  
As already explained in the previous section, the 
heterogeneity in the mana gement plane is present and will grow 
in the future. To master this heterogeneity , we propose the use 
of a meta -model capable of representing the knowledge needed 
to perform management tasks in a specific domain. This paper 
focuses on the industrial automation domain.  
 
Fig. 1 Human -centered concept of comprehensive  management  function 
models. The network manager knows what functions and information  are 
needed in each network to perform a given management operation.  
The CMFM  – briefly introduced in  [9] – is a human centered 
concept. For a visual concept of it, see Fig. 1. The main idea is 
that the person r esponsible of the network management knows 
what management operations are required in a given context.  
This person thinks about the management operations in an 
abstract way  – represented by the arrow blocks in the think 
bubble in the picture . With some experience and knowledge 
about different network management systems, the network 
manager  is able to translate his  abstract concept of management 
to the different known network management systems in order to 
execute them.   
A very simple example would be to set the network address 
of a device. In a  PROFIBUS,  it just would be required to know 
which variable to set via a set command. In a network with Web 
Based Enterprise Management ( WBEM ) [10], it would be as 
easy as to set the correct property of the correct objec t in the 
object tree.  On the other hand, with SNMP the network address 
is read -only in the standard community Management 
Authorized licensed use limited to: SLUB Dresden. Downloaded on October 21,2025 at 17:31:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

Page 3
 
 Information Base (MIB) and can only be changed if the 
enterprise MIB of the manufacturer offers this functionality  and 
if it is known where /how . 
This abstract understanding of the management operations is 
the core of the  “Comprehensive Management Function Models” 
(CMFM). From the point of view of the network manager, the 
goal of the management operations is decisive. It is likewise 
important to kno w what information is required to execute the 
management operations, as well as, the output information 
expected. In a first draft, the C MFMs consist of – at least – a 
goal, the required information, and the expected output 
information.  The management func tions, operations, and 
methods  presented in Table  1 are the basis for the different 
management systems. Actually, all of them perform the 
management operations needed by the corresponding network. 
If the goal of a group of  function s is the same, i.e. management, 
then it has to be possible to find equivalences between the 
different groups . In a closer look, i t is easy to realize that 
“InvokeMethod” [11] from WBEM  and “invocation of stateless 
and/or state -oriented functions” of PROFIBUS [8] follow t he 
same goal.  SNMP pres ents no direct equivalent , but it is also 
capable of triggering a function in a node. This is , in a very 
simple example,  where the CMFM  can help to deal with the 
heterogeneity in the management plane.  
To achieve a given goal a set of management functions w ill 
be required. This set of management functions depends on the 
actual network management system used. For example, to 
trigger a reset in a field device using WBEM a procedure call 
will suf fice, while in a field device using SNMP a value has to 
be written  in the correct variable of the Management Information 
Base (MIB). For the network manager , it remains the same goal 
of resetting a field device regarding of the management system.  
The required information is, following the example of resetting 
a field dev ice, for instance the identifier or address of the 
targeted field device. Other possibly required information for 
this example could be the accreditation information in case of 
implemented security countermeasures. The expected output 
information would be in this example a confirmation of the reset 
or rather a notification of the failed operation.  
The management of heterogeneous industrial networks can 
be abstracted to the management of a network of networks. An 
industrial production facility normally  presents many different 
networks. The office uses standard IT networks while the shop floor can usually consist of different  legacy industrial 
communication systems. Connecting all of them together will 
result in a network of networks.  However, there is th e handicap 
that some of these networks – the legacy industrial communic -
ation systems – were not designed to interoperate with other 
technologies . They  remain robust systems far away from the 
flexibility required by the curren t trends in i ndustry  [12]. In this 
constellation of new and old working together, the network 
management will play a central role that has been relegat ed to 
the engineering tools in i ndustry for too long. The concept of the 
management of a network of network s relies on the possibility 
of access the different network management syst ems with a 
seamless integration, enabling it to become a holistic 
management approach. The goal is to manage the network of 
networks , as it was a single network . To achieve this goa l, it is 
imperative to reach a sufficient level of abstraction that will 
enable a network manager functionality to perform the required 
orchestration throughout the network of networks.  The approach 
of the C MFM aligns very well with the idea of interpreter 
presented in [13] but focusing on the management plane . 
Identifying the equivalences from each management system to 
the core of C MFM will ease and accelerate the development of 
holistic management systems  for specific domains . 
IV. USE-CASE  
A very probable situation in the future industrial 
development will be that a facility based on a legacy industrial 
communication system will be expanded with an IIoT sensor 
network for predictive ma intenance and early error recognition. 
This IIoT network is connected to the main IT network, e.g. 
TCP/IP over Ethernet, used in the office. Assuming that the 
legacy industrial communication system is a PROFIBUS, the 
only connection to the upper levels of the automation pyramid is 
the Ethernet port of the PLC for programming and debugging 
purposes, if it exists.  
Under the assumption that a  company builds many  
production facilities with the same blueprint  for economic 
reasons , they could be connected to a management and 
maintenance central office – operations office  – see Fig. 2.  
The operations office has to deal with three different 
management systems, i.e. the WBEM or SNMP of the IT 
network of the office, the IIoT management system that could be 
for example NETCONF, and the Fieldbus Management of the TABLE  1 NETWORK MANAGEMENT SY STEMS AND THEIR FUNC TIONS , OPERATIONS , AND/OR METHODS  
Network  Management  
System  Functions/Operations/Methods  
OSI Management  M-Create, M -Delete, M -Action, M -Set, M -Get, M -Event_Report  
WBEM  GetInstance, DeleteInstance, ModifyInstance, CreateInstance, OpenEnumerateInstances, OpenAssociators, OpenReferences, 
OpenQueryInstances, PullInstancesWithPath, PullInstances, CloseEnumeration, InvokeMethod, InvokeStaticMethod, GetClass, 
DeleteClass, ModifyClass, CreateClass, EnumerateClasses, AssociatorClasses, ReferenceClasses, GetQualifierType, 
DeleteQualifierType, Mod ifyQualifierType, CreateQualifierType, EnumerateQualifierTypes  
SNMP  GetRequest, GetNextRequest, GetBulkRequest, Response, SetRequest, InformRequest, SNMPv2 -Trap, Report  
PROFIBUS  FMA1/2: Reset, Set -Value, Read -Value, Event , Ident -Loc, SAP -Activate, RSAP -Activate, SAP -Deactivate, LSAP -Status, Live -List, 
Ident , LSAP -Status  
MS2: acyclic read and write of variables, up - and/or download of LR Data, invocation of stateless and/or state -oriented functions  
MM1: upload and download for configuration information, upload of diagnosis information, activation of the previously transferred 
configuration  
 
 
Authorized licensed use limited to: SLUB Dresden. Downloaded on October 21,2025 at 17:31:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

Page 4
 
 PROFIBUS. The C MFMs encapsulate the expertise of the 
network /system engineers  for this specific domain , enabling the 
development and integration of future communication systems 
with reduced effort.  
 
Fig. 2 Network structure described in the Use -Case section of this paper.  
We assume that a t some point in time, the IIoT sensor 
network  will show a better accuracy than the sensors connected 
to the PROFIBUS. Using a proxy  or gateway , the IIoT network 
can deliver more accurate information than that  preform  
provided by the old sensors to the control loops  in the  PLC. An 
illustrating example  in this use -case is the monitoring of the 
communication jitter or end-to-end (E2E) delay, from the IIoT 
sensor network to the PLC in the legacy industrial 
communication system. This monitoring would be only possible 
by accessing the management of the industrial network to  follow 
up the delivery of the information. To calculate the total delay it 
is imperative to gather monitoring information of both networks . 
Here is where a CMFM monitor E2E delay would help by 
gathering the knowledge and information necessary to monitor 
the corresponding delay in both management systems. With this 
knowledge properly modeled and represented, a management 
system could automatically gather the required information and 
perform the required operations to get the total E2E delay of 
concern.  Othe r motivation to make use of a holistic management 
is the possibility of expanding the flexibility of the industrial 
system with the help of proxies to encapsulate and digest the 
changes that the industrial system is not able to realize without 
exhaustive e ngineering.  
V. CONCLUSIO N 
The steady developments of Ethernet with the Time 
Sensitive Networking task force promise a seamless coexistence 
of all communication requirements in the same network. The 
implementation of this new technology  in the industrial facil ities 
is however a very complex task. The existence of still running 
facilities with legacy industrial communication systems explains 
the need of interoperability in a brown field situation . This 
integration will require also a roadmap to ensure the viabil ity and 
secure the success of such evolution. The interoperability in the 
data plane  can achieve a seamless communication as well 
vertically as also horizontally in the whole automation pyramid.  
Nevertheless, the challenge of the management of heterogeneou s 
industrial networks  remains . In this topic,  the CMFM s represent a simple but powerful solution to guarantee not only the 
manageability of the current systems but also the seamless 
integration of future communication technologies and concepts 
yet to come.  
Further investigation will be required to establish the 
approach of the CMFMs . Under the next steps,  follow the listing 
of domain specific required and optional CMFMs.  The use of 
semantics and ontologies, in combination with interoperability 
approaches, is the most probable way to the successfully 
implementation of holistic managements systems w here the 
CMFMs play a central role.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENT  
This work was partially fu nded by the German Federal 
Ministry of Education and Research as part of the research 
project “Future Industrial Network Architecture “(FIND).  
REFERENCES  
[1]  European Commission, "FACTORIES OF THE FUTURE - 
Multi -annual roadmap for the contractual PPP under Horizon 2020," 
Publications Office of the European Union, Luxembourg, 2013.  
[2]  BMWi, "Industrie 4.0 und Digitale Wirtschaft," 2015. [Online]. 
Available: http://www.bmwi.de/. [Accessed 2015].  
[3]  M. Wollschlaeger, T. Sauter and J. Jasperneite, "The Future of 
Industrial Communication: Automation Networks in the Era of the 
Internet of  Things and Industry 4.0," IEEE Industrial Electronics 
Magazine, pp. 17 -27, 1 11 2017.  
[4]  Klettner, Christian et. al., „Namur Open Architecture,“ atp magazin, 
pp. 20 -37, 09 03 2017.  
[5]  NAMUR, NE 133 - Wireless Sensor Netzwerke: Anforderungen an 
die Konvergenz der verfügbaren Standards, 2010.  
[6]  Platform Industrie 4.0, "Structure of the Administration Shell," 2016. 
[Online]. Available: https://www.plattform -
i40.de/I40/Redaktion/EN/Downloads/Publikation/structure -of-the-
administration -shell.html. [Accessed 30 04 2018].  
[7]  ISO/IEC JTC 1, ISO/IEC 10040: Information technology - Open 
systems interconnection - Systems management overview, 
International Electrotecnichal Commission, 1998.  
[8]  TC 65/SC 65C - Industrial networks, IEC 61158 -1:2014: Industrial 
communication networks - Fieldbus specifications - Part 1: Overview 
and guidance for the IEC 61158 and IEC 61784 series, International 
Electrotechnical Commission, 2014.  
[9]  S. Soler Perez  Olaya, "Comprehensive function models for the 
management of heterogeneous industrial networks as enabler for 
interoperability," I-ESA 2018 Berlin, Mar 2018.  
[10]  Distributed Management Task Force, Inc., "DSP0198: WBEM 
Glossary," 2014. [Online]. Availab le: 
https://www.dmtf.org/sites/default/files/standards/documents/DSP019
8_1.0.0.pdf. [Accessed 2018].  
[11]  Distributed Management Task Force, Inc., "DSP0223 Generic 
Operations Specification v2.0.0," 2015. [Online]. Available: 
https://www.dmtf.org/sites/de fault/files/standards/documents/DSP022
3_2.0.0.pdf. [Accessed 2018].  
[12]  Arbeitskreises Systemaspekte im Fachverband Automation, 
Kommunikation im Industrie -4.0-Umfeld, Frankfurt am Main: ZVEI 
Fachverband Automation, 2018.  
[13]  H. Derhamy , J. Eliasson  and J. Delsing, "IoT Interoperability - On-
Demand and Low Latency Transparent Multiprotocol Translator," 
IEEE Internet of Things Journal, pp. 1754 -1763, Oct 2017.  
 
 
Authorized licensed use limited to: SLUB Dresden. Downloaded on October 21,2025 at 17:31:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 